Recent Advances in Materials, Designs and Applications of Skin Electronics

YAO, Kuanming; YANG, Yawen; WU, Pengcheng; ZHAO, Guangyao; WANG, Lidai; YU,
Xinge




Published: 01/01/2023



Document Version:
Final Published version, also known as Publisher’s PDF, Publisher’s Final version or Version of Record


License:
CC BY


Publication record in CityUHK Scholars:
Go to record


Published version (DOI):
10.1109/OJNANO.2022.3218960


Publication details:
YAO, K., YANG, Y., WU, P., ZHAO, G., WANG, L., & YU, X. (2023). Recent Advances in Materials, Designs and
Applications of Skin Electronics. IEEE Open Journal of Nanotechnology, 4, 55-70.
https://doi.org/10.1109/OJNANO.2022.3218960




Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on CityUHK Scholars is the Post-print version (also known as Accepted Author
Manuscript, Peer-reviewed or Author Final version), it may differ from the Final Published version. When citing, ensure that
you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination and other details.

General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the CityUHK Scholars portal is retained by the author(s) and/or other
copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal
requirements associated with these rights. Users may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity
or commercial gain.
Publisher permission
Permission for previously published items are in accordance with publisher's copyright policies sourced from the SHERPA
RoMEO database. Links to full text versions (either Published or Post-print) are only available if corresponding publishers
allow open access.

Take down policy
Contact lbscholars@cityu.edu.hk if you believe that this document breaches copyright and provide us with details. We will
remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.


Download date: 29/09/2026
                       Received 7 October 2022; revised 27 October 2022; accepted 29 October 2022. Date of publication 2 November 2022;
                         date of current version 3 February 2023. The review of this article was arranged by Associate Editor Binghao Wang.
                                                                 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/OJNANO.2022.3218960




         Recent Advances in Materials, Designs and
              Applications of Skin Electronics
         KUANMING YAO                       1 , YAWEN YANG1 , PENGCHENG WU                                1 , GUANGYAO ZHAO1 , LIDAI WANG                              1,

                                                                          AND XINGE YU                  1,2
                                        1
                                         Department of Biomedical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China
                 2
                   Hong Kong Center for Cerebra-Cardiovascular Health Engineering (COCHE), Hong Kong Science Park, New Territories, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China
                                CORRESPONDING AUTHORS: LIDAI WANG; XINGE YU (e-mail: lidawang@cityu.edu.hk; xingeyu@cityu.edu.hk)
            The work of Xinge Yu was supported in part by the City University of Hong Kong under Grants 9667221 and 9680322, in part by the Research Grants Council of
             the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region under Grants 21210820 and 11213721, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
            62122002, in part by the Innovation and Technology Fund of Innovation and Technology Commission under Grant GHP/095/20GD, in part by Shenzhen Science
            and Technology Innovation Commission under Grant JCYJ20200109110201713, in part by the InnoHK Project on Project 2.2 - AI-based 3D ultrasound imaging
           algorithm at Hong Kong Centre for Cerebro-Cardiovascular Health Engineering (COCHE), in part by the Center of Flexible Electronics Technology, and in part by
                                                                  Qiantang Science Technology Innovation Center.




          ABSTRACT       As electronic devices get smaller, more portable, and smarter, a new approach of realizing
          electronics in thin, soft, and even stretchable style that could be worn and attached to the skin, which
          is called skin electronics, has emerged and attracted much attention. To achieve well compliance, extend
          the maximum stretchability, promote the comfortability of wearing, and make the most use of the skin
          electronics, researchers are making efforts in different aspects. In this article, we summarized the recent
          advances in categories of materials science, design strategies and novel applications. Examples of skin elec-
          tronics using various functional materials including piezoelectric, thermoelectric, etc., and soft conductive
          materials including PEDOT: PSS-based conductive polymer, carbon nanomaterials, metal-based materials
          and hydrogels were given. Different mechanics design strategies for enhancing mechanical performance and
          comfortability design strategies for better wearing experience were introduced. Lastly, practical applications
          of skin electronics in fields of smart healthcare and human-machine interface were discussed. Research
          focused on these aspects all boosted the development of skin electronics in different dimensions, with which
          combined together may help skin electronics take a leap into truly ubiquitous use in our daily life.

          INDEX TERMS Engineering in medicine and biology/biomedical engineering/biomedical electronics, in-
          dustrial electronics/assembly systems/flexible electronics, sensors/wearable sensors.




                                                                                             filling these gaps between rigid electronics and soft human
I. INTRODUCTION                                                                              body, which gives more opportunities for electronics in var-
Electronics has been evolving over a century since J.A. Flem-                                ious fields and may become a next evolutional platform for
ing invented the first vacuum diode in 1897, as the sizes of                                 future electronics.
components and boards got smaller and smaller, integrated                                        Since the first stretchable single crystal silicon wavy ribbon
circuits helped people shrink massive computers into portable,                               is demonstrated in 2006 [1], people have explored numer-
mobile, and even wearable devices. However, as traditional                                   ous new materials, methods, structures, advanced fabrication
electronics are based on silicon and rigid printed circuit                                   process, and innovative applications for the development of
boards (PCB), they apparently don’t perfectly suit wearable                                  soft, flexible and stretchable electronics. Apart from those
scenarios, where movements, deformations, perspirations and                                  for implanted use, skin electronics is typically applied on the
breathing of the skin might be hindered due to the mismatch-                                 skin outside of the body, functions for sensing physiologi-
ing between Young’s moduli, flexibility and permeability of                                  cal signals, monitoring physical activities, harvesting energy
rigid electronics and human body. In this context, the concept                               from daily life, and delivering medical therapies, stimulations,
of soft, thin and stretchable skin electronics is brought up for                             or perceptible information to the human body. The goal of
                    This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
VOLUME 4, 2023                                                                                                                                                              55
YAO ET AL.: RECENT ADVANCES IN MATERIALS, DESIGNS AND APPLICATIONS OF SKIN ELECTRONICS




                                                                        of thin and conformable enough to be imperceptible, and
                                                                        permeable, breathable in styles of textiles and clothes. Last
                                                                        but not least, we listed a series of advanced research work
                                                                        on skin electronics in different applications, which can be
                                                                        roughly categorized into two sub-groups according to their
                                                                        purposes, which are healthcare-oriented and human-machine
                                                                        interface (HMI) related skin electronics.

                                                                        II. MATERIALS FOR SKIN ELECTRONICS
                                                                        A. SUBSTRATE AND ENCAPSULATION
                                                                        For soft and stretchable electronics, related substrate materials
                                                                        largely determine their functional performance, as almost all
                                                                        functional electronic devices and circuit connections must
                                                                        be carried by various substrates during the manufacturing
                                                                        process or as final products. Required substrate materials
                                                                        for flexible electronics manufacturing are usually soft and
                                                                        bendable films, such as common polyethylene terephthalate
                                                                        (PET), polyimide (PI), etc. However, for skin electronics,
                                                                        requirements for the intrinsic properties of substrate materi-
FIGURE 1. Schematics of skin electronics in the aspects of materials,
designs, and applications.
                                                                        als are more stringent, such as the biocompatibility between
                                                                        substrate materials and the skin (non-toxic to the skin, and
                                                                        low likelihood of causing allergic to the skin), similarity or
                                                                        matching of Young’s modulus of skin and substrate materials,
realizing high-fidelity signal or information interacting with
                                                                        the conformality between substrate materials and the skin,
the skin means the device should be able to intimately con-
                                                                        and the ductility of substrate materials, etc. Often reported
tact with the skin without peeling off, and maintains stable
                                                                        soft substrate materials for skin electronics are silicone-
electrical or mechanical performance even when it undergoes
                                                                        based elastomers (Ecoflex, PDMS) [2], [3] and rubbers (SBS,
stretching, bending or twisting caused by natural movements
                                                                        SEBS) [4], [5], and more, hydrogels, as three-dimensional
and deformations of the skin. That means the materials for
                                                                        network polymer materials filled with water, possessing good
composing skin electronics should either be intrinsically or
                                                                        flexibility and biocompatibility, therefore are increasingly
engineered to be flexible and stretchable. Meanwhile, the
                                                                        used as interface materials between skin and soft electron-
adhesiveness, bio-compatibility (that won’t cause allergic re-
                                                                        ics. The intrinsic superior compliance of Ecoflex substrates
sponse), moisture permeability, wireless independence and
                                                                        makes them often used in skin electronics with large cur-
unobtrusiveness are also desired for developing ideal skin
                                                                        vature deformation and huge stretch [6], [7], [8]. Unlike
electronics.
                                                                        the preparation process involving chemical cross-linking of
   To develop high performance skin electronics devices and
                                                                        silicone elastomers, polystyrene-block-polybutadiene-block-
systems that meet the needs mentioned above, researchers
                                                                        polystyrene (SBS) and polystyrene-block-poly (ethylene
made efforts in different aspects of it, from basic chemistry
                                                                        butylene)-block-polystyrene (SEBS) are typical block copoly-
and materials parts of the device, the mechanics and elec-
                                                                        mers, and can be prepared into elastomers by physical
trical engineering parts, integration and miniaturization, to
                                                                        cross-linking method (e.g, solvent evaporation), which al-
exploring the potential applications in various fields. In this
                                                                        lows them to match more substrate manufacturing crafts
review, we summarized recent high impact and representa-
                                                                        [4], [5]. Hydrogels, which closely resemble human tis-
tive research advances in skin electronics and categorized
                                                                        sue due to their abundant water content, are considered
them in three main topics, materials, designs and applica-
                                                                        very promising as tissue-electronic interfaces [9], [10]. Be-
tions, each for one chapter (Fig. 1). For the materials part,
                                                                        sides, some water-soluble substrate materials, such as PVA,
we firstly introduce most commonly used options in substrate
                                                                        are widely used in skin electronics’ fabrication/transfer
selection, followed by examples in functional materials with
                                                                        process [11].
specific physical or chemical properties for different purposes,
and more importantly, the typical soft conductive materials
which are essential for constructing electrical connections             B. FUNCTIONAL MATERIALS
and circuits, to make them flexible and stretchable enough              With further research on skin electronics, varieties of func-
for stably working on soft and deforming skin. The designs              tional skin electronics have been designed and developed to
chapter discussed several mechanics design strategies that              satisfy people’s individual needs, such as resistance-based
help turn unstretchable materials (e.g., metal) into stretch-           sensors for strain and tactile detection, electronic skins with
able formats, and different routes for fabricating the skin             energy harvesting devices, or electro-chromic/luminescent
electronics with higher comfortability for wearing, in aspects          functions, etc. To meet the functional requirements mentioned

56                                                                                                                          VOLUME 4, 2023
FIGURE 2. Functional materials for skin electronics. (a) PZT-based piezoelectric actuator and sensor for tissue modulus detection [12]; (b) Self-powered
system with integrated PZT-based energy generator and PMN-PT-based capacitor [13]; (c) PMN-PT-based piezoelectric film for direct electrical stimulation
of cardiac pacing [14]; (d) PVDF-based self-powered mechanoreceptor for e-skin with stimulus recognition [15]; (e) Piezoelectric fiber films by
electrospinning PVDF organic solution for e-skin [16]; (f) Wearable thermoelectric generator through Lego-like reconfigurable design based on Bi and Sb
chalcogenides thermoelectric legs [19]; (g) Flexible perovskite arrays for photodetection [20]; (h) Electrochromic polymer-based e-skin for touch sensing
[22]; (i) electrochromic e-skin based on inorganic electrochromic material (WO3 ) [23]; (j) Stretchable electroluminescent e-skin based on ZnO phosphors
[2].




above and principles for wearables, the selection and design                  a thickness of 500 nm, and utilized the piezoelectric ef-
of functional materials are essential to manufacturing skin                   fect and inverse piezoelectric effect of PZT to detect tissue
electronics. To start with, piezoelectric ceramic materials are               modulus (Fig. 2(a)). Peddigari et al. [13] designed an all-
often utilized in transducing between mechanical pressure                     in-one skin electronic system integrating energy harvesting
and electrical signals, and thus can be adopted for pres-                     and storage, in which flexible PZT film was used as the
sure sensors. Yu et al. [12] fabricated piezoelectric ceramic                 energy harvesting material due to its excellent piezoelectric
lead zirconate titanate (Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3, PTZ) films with                  properties, and Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3–PbTiO3 (PMN–PT) was

VOLUME 4, 2023                                                                                                                                        57
YAO ET AL.: RECENT ADVANCES IN MATERIALS, DESIGNS AND APPLICATIONS OF SKIN ELECTRONICS




used as the capacitor material (Fig. 2(b)). Similarly, work            which can change human visual perception under the effect
by Hwang et al. [14] employed flexible PMN–PT thin film                of electrical energy. Chou et al. [22] fabricated stretchable
as piezoelectric layer for developing a self-powered cardiac           electrochromic thin layers by spin-coating electrochromic
pacemaker (Fig. 2(c)). In addition to the piezoelectric ceram-         polymers, and achieved tactile sensing through color changes
ics mentioned above, piezoelectric polymers are also common            by pressing-induced changes in applied voltage (Fig. 2(h)).
functional materials for flexible piezoelectric skin electronics       Similarly, inorganic material WO3 is also often employed to
due to their better compliance and capacity to be fabricated           fabricate electrochromic devices, for instance, Yun et al. [23]
into desired structures through common processes. Chun et al.          fabricated stretchable electrochromic supercapacitors basing
[15] reported a flexible self-powered mechanoreceptor sensor           WO3 nanotubes coated with PEDOT: PSS (Fig. 2(i)). Elec-
using polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) film as piezoelectric             troluminescent materials offer exciting prospects for skin
layer to achieve simulating the perception of complex pressure         electronics with machine-vision interaction and flexible dis-
stimuli by human skin (Fig. 2(d)). Wang et al. [16] dissolved          play. Work by Larson et al. [2] reported an electroluminescent
PVDF in an organic solvent, then prepared fiber films with             elastomer that can withstand huge deformation while elec-
both piezoelectric and pyroelectric effects by electrospinning         troluminescence by embedding electroluminescent materials
the mixture solution (Fig.2(e)).                                       (ZnS phosphor) into the elastomer and forming a multi-layer
   Flexible electronic devices based on thermoelectric en-             structure (Fig. 2(j)). Similarly, Zhao et al. [24] synthesized
ergy conversion are another promising alternative, since, skin         ZnS: Cu, Al phosphor particles with higher luminous effi-
electronics are in direct or close contact with the human              ciency as electroluminescent materials for self-powered touch
body, which provides the entire system with continuous and             display.
stable heat. There are mainly two aspects to the design of
thermoelectric energy conversion devices in skin electronics:
1) the original fabrication of functional thermoelectric en-           C. CONDUCTIVE MATERIALS
ergy conversion components (including fundamental material             For the material system of skin electronics, in addition
design and process development, etc.); 2) the optimization             to functional materials for specific functions and sub-
of structure and mechanics based on commercially avail-                strate/encapsulation materials for overall protection, conduc-
able thermoelectric energy conversion devices. Cao et al.              tive materials are essential to achieve the interconnection of
[17] fabricated BiTe-SbTe-based flexible thermocouples using           soft functional components and the complete function of the
screen printing process, and investigated the effect of dif-           whole circuits. To match specific application scenarios, the
ferent binders on the thermoelectric performance. Based on             design and selection of conductive materials in skin elec-
commercially available thermoelectric legs, Kim et al. [18]            tronics is very critical to maintaining overall flexibility and
conducted structural design and optimization research on ther-         functionality, and common conductive materials for inter-
moelectric energy conversion devices to achieve flexibility            connection of electronic components can be roughly divided
and functionality of the overall device through experiments            into four categories according to conductive properties:1)
and simulations. Ren et al. [19] developed a wearable and self-        conductive polymer [25], [26]; 2) carbon-based conductive
healing, reconfigurable thermoelectric generator (Fig. 2(f)).          nanomaterials (graphene [27], [28], carbon nanotube [29]
This device is based on thin film Bi and Sb chalcogenides              et al.); 3) metal-based conductive materials (gold [11] , sil-
deposited on PI films as the n/p-type legs, and utilized liquid        ver[25], [27] etc.); 4) hydrogel-based conductive materials
metal’s self-healing capability to realize Lego-like reconfig-         [30]. A type of conductive material may also be combined
uring, which helped it to be stretchable while owning a high           with other conductive components or modified in molecular
open circuit voltage of 1V/cm2 and a maximum power output              structures for achieving better compliance and functionality.
of 19µW/cm2 at temperature difference of 95K. Functional               For example, PEDOT: PSS is the most typical and widely
perovskite-based devices have exciting applications in skin            studied conductive polymer in skin electronics. As shown in
electronics, especially photodetectors, work by Wu et al.              Fig. 3(a), Ershad et al. [25] mixed silver flakes into PEDOT:
[20] demonstrated fine flexible perovskite arrays for light            PSS solution to obtain a conductive ink for mask printing
sensing and real-time light trajectory capture (Fig. 2(g)).            directly on the skin surface, and the mixture ink also can
And Lei et al. [21] achieved fabrication of ultrathin per-             be used to write conductive connections on skin with a ball-
ovskite film (∼600 nm to ∼100 μm) with precise control                 point pen. A topological supramolecular structure based on
by lithography-assisted epitaxial growth method for single-            PEDOT: PSS was designed by Jiang et al. [26] to achieve
crystal photovoltaic devices.                                          high conductivity and better stretchability in small-scale fab-
   For a long time, controllable and flexible optoelectronic           rication (Fig. 3(b)). Carbon-based nanomaterials are regarded
display devices have been a popular research area for ex-              as promising conductive interconnections in skin electronics
panding skin electronic functions, which can provide the               due to their excellent processability and compatibility with
most direct means for human-machine interaction and human-             various functional/substrate materials. Graphene patterns with
environment interaction. There are two main novel methods              low sheet resistance can be easily fabricated by transient laser
for realizing wearable and flexible optoelectronic display:            heating PI films [31], for instance, patterns fabricated by car-
electrochromic (EC) and electroluminescence (EL), both of              bon dioxide laser-induced graphene (LIG) are employed for

58                                                                                                                         VOLUME 4, 2023
FIGURE 3. Conductive materials for skin electronics. (a) Hybrid conductive ink composed of Ag flakes and PEDOT: PSS for in-situ printing [25]; (b) PEDOT:
PSS-based topological supramolecular structure with better stretchability and high conductivity at tiny scales [26]; (c) LIG-based gas-permeable
electrophysiological sensor [28]; (d) Biofuel cells with LIG as catalyst carrier [27]; (e) Serpentine Au foils designed for conformal skin electronics [32]; (f)
Liquid-metal-based e-skin by in-situ stamp printing [34]; (g) Conductive hydrogel based on PANI polymer network [36]; (j) Ionic conducting hydrogels
with NaCl as electrolyte [41].




electrophysiological signals detection [28] (Fig. 3(c)) and bio-                    The advantage that metal-based conductive materials have
fuel cells [27]. Sun et al. et [28] utilized the precise patterning              over other conductive materials is their high electrical conduc-
of LIG to fabricate complex functional circuits, while the high                  tivity. However, bulk metals are mostly rigid and unbendable,
porosity of graphene provides a new option for comfortable                       which seems to be incompatible with soft and stretchable
and breathable skin electronics. Huang et al. proposed a tran-                   skin electronics. Therefore, necessary structural design and
sient, ultrathin and implantable biofuel cell by LIG and Au                      process optimization are required for intrinsically rigid metal
nanoparticles [27] (Fig. 3(d)), which harvests energy from the                   connections in skin electronics (detailed description in next
oxidation of glucose and obtains high open circuit potential                     section); for instance, gas-permeable Au nanomeshes [11]
of 0.77V and maximum power density of 483.1µW/cm2 . Kim                          and lightweight serpentine Au foils [32] (Fig. 3(e)) are fab-
et al. [29] developed a reconfigurable, low-modulus conduc-                      ricated to form conformal contact with skin. Another class
tive clay based on carbon nanotubes for electronic skin with                     of metal-based materials that are very promising for e-skin
thermoelectric energy conversion.                                                fabrication are gallium-based liquid metals, which, like the

VOLUME 4, 2023                                                                                                                                               59
YAO ET AL.: RECENT ADVANCES IN MATERIALS, DESIGNS AND APPLICATIONS OF SKIN ELECTRONICS




well-known mercury (Hg), are fluid at room temperature and             structure, wavy pattern, and pre-stretching based 2D/3D struc-
have metallic electrical conductivity. Notably, unlike metal-          ture. Then we summarized three types of comfortability
lic mercury, gallium-based liquid metals have low vapor                design to enhance the user’s experience of skin electronics,
pressures and negligible toxicity [33], which enables them             which conclude tattoo-based, textile and garment-based, and
to be used as conductive connections in skin electronics. Wu           fiber-based skin electronics.
et al. [34] stamp-printed liquid-metal-based conductive nan-
oclay to fabricate e-skin with excellent electrical conductivity
in situ on the arm (Fig. 3(f)). Not only bulk liquid metals            A. MECHANICS DESIGNS
can be used to print e-skins in situ, but liquid metal particles       Serpentine structure, as a kind of structure commonly used in
similarly. Lee et al. [35] achieved high-precision mask print-         flexible electronics, has been proven to significantly improve
ing of electronic tattoos directly on the skin based on liquid         the elasticity and stretchability of intrinsically rigid metal
metal particle coated with Pt-modified CNTs. Hydrogel-                 interconnections in stretchable electronic devices [42], [43].
based conductive materials have become a popular option as             Song et al. [44] introduced stacked multilayer network mate-
connecting components in skin electronics due to their bio-            rials as a synergistic platform with serpentine interconnects to
compatibility, pluripotency, and functionality easy to extend          integrate and encapsulate electronic devices (Fig. 4(a)). The
and modify. The design ideas of hydrogel-based conductive              proposed strategy demonstrates a miniaturized electronic sys-
materials can be roughly divided into three categories accord-         tem (11 mm×10 mm), with the elastic stretchability of ∼20%
ing to the components that play a conductive role, namely              and large area coverage (∼110%), which has great potential
polymer conduction [36], penetrating network conduction                in compass displays, somatosensory mouse and physiological
[37] and ionic conduction [38], [39]. Work by Wang et al.              signal monitoring. Serpentine-based skin electronics is also
[36] proposed an interpenetrating network hydrogel in which            very essential for infant health clinical care, Chung et al. [45]
poly(acrylamide-co-hydroxyethyl methyl acrylate) (P(AAm-               developed an epidermal electronic system (EES), which can
co-HEMA)) network endowed the hydrogel system with                     be used for electrocardiogram (ECG) and PPG monitoring
toughness and interpenetrating polyaniline (PANI) polymer              (Fig. 4(b)). The electronic layer contains a set of thin, narrow
network assumed the conductive function (Fig. 3(g)). Ohm               serpentine metal traces that interconnect multiple, chip-scale
et al. [37] mixed silver flakes into PAAm-alginate hydrogels,          integrated circuit components. With this structure, the device
and dehydrated them so that the silver flakes formed pene-             can bend to smaller radii (6.4 mm and 5mm) than required
trating networks inside hydrogels to fabricate stretchable and         (>∼140 mm and >∼50 mm for the chest and foot) without
highly conductive hydrogels. Similarly, Tringides et al. [40]          damage. When uniaxial stretching the ECG EES up to 16%
mixed CNTs and graphene into alginate to form conductive               and PPG EES up to 13%, the electronics and antenna structure
penetrating networks to enhance the electrical conductivity            remain below the limit of plastic deformation (∼0.3%). And
of alginate hydrogels for electrode array. Since water in the          even when device is stretched to 20% strain, the inductance,
hydrogel occupies the absolute dominant component, water-              Q factor and resonant frequency of the antenna vary very little
soluble ions can dissolve in the hydrogel and serve as main            (< 5%).
conductive component; both sodium chloride [38] and potas-                Fractal pattern refers to the self-similarity of a geomet-
sium [39] chloride are common ion-conducting components                ric pattern, complete or approximate resemblance to a part
in conductive hydrogels. To obtain much better stretchabil-            of itself [46]. Especially in mechanics design of skin elec-
ity and transparency than metal conductors, Keplinger et al.           tronics, such as von Koch curve, Peano curve, Hibert curve,
[41] et al. fabricated totally transparent ionically conductive        Moore curve, Vicsek fractal, Greek cross, etc., which can be
hydrogels with sodium chloride as electrolyte for stretchable          engineered to accommodate enhanced elastic strains along
actuators that generate strain under high voltage, and can even        selected dimensions and support biaxial, radial, and other
be used as a transparent loudspeaker(Fig. 3(h)).                       deformation modes. With “All Vertical” Peano pattern design,
                                                                       silicon nanomembrane can reach a largest deformation with
III. ADVANCED DESIGN STRATEGIES                                        100% strain and high areal coverage [47] (Fig. 4(c)). Tian
Human skin is mechanically flexible and may deform seri-               et al. [48] fabricated a three-set electrode array, each consists
ously during movements and actions, thus proper mechanics              17 fractal mesh electrodes in Greek-cross patterns, and this
design strategies are needed for endowing skin electronics             fractal mesh electrode suggests an elastic stretchability of
a certain degree of flexibility and stretchability so as to en-        18% (assuming a yield strain of 0.3% for the gold), which
sure conformability of the skin interface, stable electrical           is sufficient for straining during natural motion of skin.
performance and signal fidelity during usage in daily life.               Originating from the natural honeycomb of bees, hon-
Meanwhile, as skin electronics are directly attached to or             eycomb structure, which consists of uniformly-distributed
integrated on human skin, wearing comfortability is very im-           hexagonal cells has been extensively studied in soft electron-
portant, and lots of efforts have also been made by researchers        ics, because this porous structure has a large surface area to
on the comfortability designs of skin electronics.                     volume ratio and excellent mechanical properties. Recently,
   In this section, we summarized six representative types of          Chen et al. [49] combined an organic semiconductor film
mechanics design strategies, which are serpentine structure,           with a honeycomb structure to develop a high-performance
fractal pattern, honeycomb structure, trampoline-inspired              organic electrochemical (OECT) transistor (Fig. 4(d)),
60                                                                                                                         VOLUME 4, 2023
FIGURE 4. Mechanics designs in skin electronics. (a) Stacked multilayer network materials as a synergistic platform with serpentine interconnects.
[44](b) An epidermal electronic system (EES), which can be used for electrocardiogram (ECG) and PPG monitoring. [45] (c) Stretchable silicon
nanomembrane using fractal patterns in Peano-curve.[47] (d) Honeycomb-inspired structure in polymer film.[49] (e) Trampoline-inspired structure.[50] (f)
Wavy pattern-based structure. [51] (g-i) Pre-stretching based 2D and 3D structure. [52]–[54].



which has a charge transport stability over 30∼140% ten-                     microstructure modification using sandpapers (Fig. 4(e)), the
sional strain, only limited by metal contact fatigue. This                   triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) exhibits great sensitivity
honeycomb-semiconductor maintains high ion uptake and                        of 0.367 mV Pa-1 and accurate unchanged signal outputs
stable electrochemical and mechanical properties over 1500                   even under 35% strain, which shows great potential for self-
redox cycles with 104 stretching cycles with 30% strain. With                powered sensor and human-machine interfaces [50].
stable ECG signal recording cycles and synapse responses un-                    Wavy pattern is widely used in layout designs for stretch-
der varying strains, it offers a great opportunity for advanced              able skin electronics. Kang et al. [51] designed a vibrotactile
skin electronics.                                                            actuator based on wavy Ag microwire array, which highly
   Trampoline-inspired structure design is a strategy for im-                promotes vibration intensity and cycling performance because
proving the electrical performance of skin electronics under                 of great areal coverage and improved mechanical stability
stretching and out-of-plane deformations. Combined with the                  (Fig. 4(f)). As a result, this vibrotactile actuator can be

VOLUME 4, 2023                                                                                                                                        61
YAO ET AL.: RECENT ADVANCES IN MATERIALS, DESIGNS AND APPLICATIONS OF SKIN ELECTRONICS




adopted on a commercial wearable smart watch directly and              under constant tapping (≈16 kPa). It can also be customized
exhibits stable performance over 1000 actuating cycles.                into various tattoo patterns, which indicates great potential
   When 2D and 3D buckling structures are needed, pre-                 in wearable nanogenerators and human-machine interface.
stretching turns up to be a commonly used method for                   Norton et al. [56] developed a fractal mesh geometry of soft
preparing these special structures. Huang et al. [52] pre-             foldable electrode, which can be mounted on the complex
sented an extremely stretchable flexible transparent electrode         surface topology of the auricle and the mastoid directly and
by transferring metal nanofibers to a pre-stretched PDMS sub-          chronically. It can provide high-fidelity and long-term capture
strate and then release to induce an in-plane sinusoidal wavy          of electroencephalogram (EEG), and can be equipped for two
structure, which achieved the superior mechanical stretchabil-         weeks throughout daily activities, such as vigorous exercise,
ity with tensile strains up to 300% in Au nanotrough networks          swimming, sleeping, and bathing (Fig. 5(b)).
(Fig. 4(g)). The Au nanotrough networks can be stretched up               Integrating skin electronics into clothes is also an ingenious
to 120% repeatedly for 100000 cycles, demonstrating enor-              design to make wearable devices portable and breathable.
mous potential as a stretchable flexible transparent electrode         Jiang et al. [57] integrated a nanofiber composite (LPPS-NFC)
in skin electronics. Ma et al. [4] fabricated a liquid-metal           based hybrid TENG and PENG energy harvester (TPENG)
fiber mat through pre-stretching method, with this step, the           to the top and a PENG to the bottom side of a shoe pad for
permeability of the mat was activated, and the liquid metal            collecting the energy from walking and running, which has a
formed a laterally mesh-like and vertically wrinkled structure,        promising for self-powered textile sensors and wearable elec-
which has an ultrahigh stretchability (adapt to omnidirec-             tronics (Fig. 5(c)). Textile-based materials can realize great
tional stretching over 1800% strain) and electrical stability.         breathability for skin electronics, Liang et al. [58] developed
With pre-stretching method, 3D structure can also be re-               a topology-optimized droplet energy harvesting fabric to ob-
alized easily. Xu et al. [53] reported a 3D wavy structure             tain stable and efficient output through the falling raindrops
through spray printing Ag NWs on pre-stretched multiscale              (Fig. 5(d)). Based on this self-powered device, a wireless
porous polystyreneblock-poly(ethylene-ran-butylene)-block-             wearable prototype with great flexibility and breathability is
polystyrene (SEBS), which shows a negligible change of                 successfully demonstrated to monitor the droplet properties,
electrical resistance (∼1%) at a bending radius of 1 mm and            such as temperature, pH, and salinity. Fan et al. [59] fabricated
increases ∼17% under 100% uniaxial strain (Fig. 4(h)). Jang            a triboelectric all-textile sensor with high sensing performance
et al. [54] developed a 3D architecture by releasing the pre-          (pressure sensitivity of 7.84 mV Pa-1 , response time of 20
strain to cause the 2D precursor to transform geometrically,           ms, and stability of over 105 cycles). When stitched into a
through a coordinated collection of in-plane and out-of-plane          wristband, fingerstall, sock, and chest strap, it can measure
translational and rotational motions (Fig. 4(i)). With the help        the pulse at the neck, wrist, fingertip, and ankle (Fig. 5(e)).
of a soft encapsulation strategy that applies an encapsulation         In addition, it has a good machine washability of over 40
material as a liquid precursor at a state of partial release of the    washes, which is greatly promising for future healthcare
substrate prestrain, then crosslinking it into a solid form and        monitoring.
completing the release. The elastic stretchability is enhanced            Fiber materials are always used to make wearable elec-
∼2.2 and 2.8 times for uniaxial and radial stretching compared         tronics due to their stretchability and porosity. Zhuang et al.
to the usual case of encapsulation, which can significantly            [60] reported a liquid metal (LM)-superlyophilic and stretch-
solve the engineering constraints and performance limitations          able fibrous thin-film scaffold fabricated by electrospinning
of 2D materials.                                                       of SBS, which shows high conductivity of 155900 S cm-1
                                                                       and a marginal resistance change of only 2.5-fold at 2500%
B. COMFORTABILITY DESIGNS                                              strain (Fig. 5(f)). This fiber can be patterned with printing
As for skin electronics with excellent mechanical properties,          technologies for wearable device design. Xiao et al. [61] de-
when applied to the human body, it is very important to con-           veloped a recharged solid-state Zn/MnO2 fiber battery with
sider its comfortability because it usually directly attaches to       over 500 hours cycle performance and maintaining 98.0% ca-
the skin. Therefore, there is plenty of research concentrated on       pacity after more than 1000 charging/recharging cycles, which
comfortability designs to make it thin, flexible, lightweight,         can power sensors to realize healthcare monitoring, includ-
breathable, and biocompatible.                                         ing heart rate, temperature, humidity, and altitude monitoring
   Tattoo-like skin electronic has attracted many concentra-           (Fig. 5(g)).
tions due to its properties of ultra-thin, light-weighted enough
to be imperceptible and could be seamlessly attached to the
skin. Wong et al. [55] reported a tattoo-like triboelectric            IV. APPLICATIONS
nanogenerator (TL-TENG) with thickness of tens of microm-              A. HEALTHCARE & E-MEDICINE
eters, which can interface with the skin without additional            The wearable and flexible electronic devices are crucial
adhesive layers (Fig. 5(a)). The TL-TENG demonstrates the              for accurate, continuous and long-termed healthcare and e-
stable performance of energy harvesting with the open-circuit          medicine, which can cozily cover the human epidermis acting
voltage reach to ≈180 V and short-circuit current ≈2.2 μA              like a portable and intelligent health examination center


62                                                                                                                         VOLUME 4, 2023
FIGURE 5. Comfortability designs in skin electronics. (a) Tattoo-like ultrathin triboelectric nanogenerators (TL-TENG) [55]. (b) Ultrathin
electroencephalography (EEG) electrodes as brain-computer interface [56]. (c) Nanofiber composite based energy harvester of shoepad for collecting
energy from walk and running [57]. (d) Textile-based skin electronics as energy harvesting through raindrops [58]. (e) Textile-based triboelectric sensor
with good washability [59]. (f) Liquid metal - superlyophilic and strechable fiber based material for wearable device design [60]. (g) Fiber-based Zn/MnO2
battery with high cycling stability [61].




without the limitation of time and space. Skin is an important                Electroencephalography (EEG), which records electrogram of
source to transmit and generate physiological signals.                        the electrical activity on the scalp representing the macro-
                                                                              scopic activity of the brain’s surface layer beneath. Elec-
1) ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY SIGNAL                                                   trooculography (EOG) is a technique for measuring the
Electrophysiology signals are the measurement of voltage                      standing potential of the corneo-retinal between the front and
changes or electric current or modification covering a wide                   the back of the human eye.
range of scales, from single ion channel proteins to vast                        In order to record physiological electric signals from dif-
organs like the brain. On-skin electrophysiology monitoring                   ferent channels as many as possible and achieve long-termed
techniques mainly involve electrocardiology (ECG), which                      and continuous MRI-compatible monitoring, Tian et al. [48]
gives comprehensive information about heart illness from the                  propose the manufacturing method of a large-area elec-
ventricles and atria for the study of arrhythmia, atrial fibril-              tronic interfaces and its applications on prosthetic control
lation and other cardiac disorders; Electromyography (EMG),                   and cognitive monitoring (Fig. 6(a)). As for the detection of
which analyzes and collect the electrical signals produced by                 EMG signal, large-area, body-scale epidermal systems can
the skeletal muscles for the analysis of abnormalities, mo-                   offer comprehensive EMG recording capabilities across var-
tor unit recruitment and biomechanics of human movements;                     ious muscle groups, which enables more precise control of

VOLUME 4, 2023                                                                                                                                         63
YAO ET AL.: RECENT ADVANCES IN MATERIALS, DESIGNS AND APPLICATIONS OF SKIN ELECTRONICS




FIGURE 6. Applications of skin electronics in healthcare. (a) MRI-compatible epidermal electronic interface for multichannel EMG measurements [48]. (b)
A self-adhesive, stretchable and intrinsically conductive polymer dry electrode for EEG sensing, where alpha wave were detected when eyes closed [62].
(c) Mechano-acoustic sensing patch for detecting physiological process and body motions [70]. (d) Miniaturized electromechanical devices for the
monitoring of psoriasis lesions via the biomechanics sensing of deep tissue [74]. (e) A wearable wireless, battery free sweat sensor for monitoring Na+
and pH, which is self-powered by body motion-driven TENG [76]. (f) A bioadhesive ultrasound device for 48 hours continuous imaging of living diverse
organs [83].




multifunction prostheses. Fig. 6(a) shows the epidermal EMG                  quickly. Although the dry contact electrode is more
array mounted on the right arm of the subject located in an                  durable and conductive, its application is also subject
MRI scanner, by which EMG signals of ten channels can be                     to limited stretchable and adhesive capacities. In
fully recorded respectively from one trial and after magnetic                this way, Zhang et al. [62] proposed a stretchable,
resonance artefact correction.                                               self-adhesive and fully-organic dry electrode with
   EEG acquisition usually requires multiple electrodes plac-                unique fabrication processing of biocompatible blends
ing on the scalp to monitor epilepsy, sleeping state, detecting              of      poly(ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate),
evoked potentials for brain-computer interfaces (BCI) and                    waterborne polyurethane (WPU) and D-sorbitol. As Fig. 6(b)
so on. However, commercial conductive gels-based EEG                         shown, multiple EEG electrodes are arranged to cover
electrode becomes invalid easily as the water loses                          the scalp of the subject to collect the EEG signal during

64                                                                                                                                       VOLUME 4, 2023
eye-blinking, where alpha wave could be detected during eyes      deformation in tissue via piezoelectric and electromagnetic
closed and a broader frequency range detected during eyes         sensor, which are normally used to monitor and diagnose
opened. Zulqarnain et al. proposed wireless and wearable          tissue lesions from corresponding skin diseases [72]. Degde-
ECG sensing device made of amorphous Indium Gallium Zinc          viren et al. presented an ultrathin and stretchable mechanical
oxide thin film transistors via NFC RF communications [63].       sensing device consisting of mechanical actuators and sensors
Kim et al. presented a reusable, multichannel, surface EMG        made of nanoribbons of PZT, which can apply to measure
sensor array that covers multiple muscles over sufficiently       the viscoelasticity in the near-surface areas of the epidermis.
large areas, with compliant designs that provide varying          But most of these methods only concern about the superfi-
degrees of stiffness for repetitive uses [64]. Ameri et al.       cial depth of epidermal skin tissues [73]. In this way, Song
proposed an undetectable EOG sensor system based on               et al. put forward an miniatured electromechanical devices
transparent, breathable, ultrathin, ultrasoft, and non-invasive   used to accurately measure modulus of deep tissue (∼8 mm)
graphene electronic tattoos (GET). The GET EOG can                for locating lesions associated with psoriasis [74]. Fig. 6(d)
capture high-precision EOG with an angular resolution of          shows the module measurement of guttate psoriasis based
4° of eye movement, and eye movement can be correctly             on the principle of quasi-static, tensile stress-strain responses
interpreted [65].                                                 via magnetic electromechanical modulus sensor. Furthermore,
                                                                  multiple sensors can be configured into arrays which indicates
                                                                  its potential application in wounds of arbitrary shapes.
2) MECHANICAL SIGNALS
Mechanical signals generally refer to passive and active          3) SWEAT SENSORS
epidermal mechanical vibration signals [66]. Passive me-
                                                                  Sweat contains many important chemical components as
chanical signals involve physiological mechanical signals
                                                                  physiological indicators such as sweat glucose, pH and other
produced by human tissues, such as cardiac rhythm, diastolic
                                                                  metabolites and nutrients. The flexible and wearable sweat
of skeletal muscles, gastrointestinal tract and so on. Elec-
                                                                  sensor could help monitor relevant physiochemical parame-
tronic stethoscopes and accelerometers are the two effective
                                                                  ters and the risk alarms for an accidental physiological failure
and frequently-used methods to detect passive mechanical
                                                                  during sweating after strenuous exercise. Bandodkar et al. pro-
signals. The electronic stethoscopes can translate the vibra-
                                                                  posed a wireless, battery-free and skin-interfaced electronic
tion vibrations of their diaphragm into electric signals by
                                                                  sweat sensor integrating with colorimetric reagents on the
piezoelectric [67] or triboelectric [68] materials. Unlike the
                                                                  single-use microfluidic platform, which provided real-time
ultra-thin and weak structure of electronic stethoscopes [69],
                                                                  sensing of chloride, lactate and glucose after strenuous ex-
the accelerometers have strong and durable designs. During
                                                                  ercise [75]. What’s more, Song et al. proposed a technology
vibration periods, the accelerometers can convert the inertia-
                                                                  of triboelectric nanogenerators(TENGs) based sweat sensor,
based deformation of piezoelectric material into an electric
                                                                  which can detect dynamically monitor key sweat biomarkers
signal. For example, Liu et al. [70] introduced a mechano-
                                                                  with continuous power supply created from human motion
acoustic-electrophysiological sensing platform incorporating
                                                                  (Fig. 6(e)) [76]. However, the variety of physiochemical
high-bandwidth triaxial accelerometers for both cardiovascu-
                                                                  parameters is limited to the restricted methods beyond ion-
lar disease treating and human-machine interfaces (Fig. 6(c)).
                                                                  selective and enzymatic electrodes or direct oxidation of
This platform records the mechano-acoustic responses to
                                                                  electroactive molecules. As the application scenarios of sweat
value the operation of heart like structural defects in heart
                                                                  collection are also limited by the volume of sweat, most
valves, rather than appearing in the ECG traces directly. Si-
                                                                  sweat sensors are only applied after strenuous exercise. In
multaneous ECG and heart sound measurements matched up
                                                                  this way, Wang et al. presented a new method of wearable
well where four auscultation sites (aortic, pulmonary, tricus-
                                                                  electrochemical biosensor based on the unique in situ re-
pid, mitral) for heart murmurs can be distinguished at the
                                                                  generation and calibration technologies, which enables the
magnified plot. What’s more, mechanical sensors attached to
                                                                  sensitive, selective and continuous monitoring of a wide range
the skin can capture the mechanical signal associated with
                                                                  of trace-level biomarkers including all nine essential amino
body motion and other physiological processes. Lee et al.
                                                                  acids as well as vitamins, metabolites and lipids commonly
introduced a soft, wireless mechano-acoustic sensing device
                                                                  found in human sweat [77]. Additionally, the continuous and
located at the suprasternal notch [71]. The different rotation
                                                                  sufficient sweat collection can be achieved by the new strate-
angles of the head against the torso for body-orientation cal-
                                                                  gies of the carbochol iontophoresis-based sweat induction and
ibration test at the application of distinguishing four sleep
                                                                  microfluidic-based surrounding sweat sampling.
stages can be sensed. This specific demonstration in various
actual scenarios demonstrates the ability to respiration, vocal
utterance, gait recognition and other healthcare applications.    4) IMAGING
   However, some human tissues like skin are unable to            Biomedical imaging technologies such as magnetic resonance
vibrate. Active mechanical signals generally refer to calcu-      imaging (MRI), X-rays, computed tomography (CT) and elec-
lating the biomechanics of deep tissues by loading external       trical impedance tomography (EIT) are typically used to
pressure via mechanical vibration actuator and detecting          image tissue deep into body, which are for locating the lesions

VOLUME 4, 2023                                                                                                                   65
YAO ET AL.: RECENT ADVANCES IN MATERIALS, DESIGNS AND APPLICATIONS OF SKIN ELECTRONICS




and diagnosing multiple chronic diseases. But these imaging            and power efficiency of haptic engagement [85]. An amputee
devices are normally heavy and expensive, which only provide           volunteer can adjust the force of robot hand to grasp an
a short period of tissue imaging. To overcome this disad-              eggshell via 30 pressure sensors on the hand and haptic feed-
vantage, the wearable sensing based on variable methods of             back interface on the upper arm. Additionally, Sun et al. [86]
optical [45], thermal [78], chemical [79], terahertz [80], radio       proposed augmented tactile-perception and haptic-feedback
frequency mechanisms [81] are proposed, which penetration              rings (ATH-Rings) for human-machine interface based on VR
depth or spatial resolution are unsatisfactory for human tissue        devices, which achieved finger bending sensing by TENG
imaging. As the ultrasound has significant penetration depth           sensor and temperature detecting by flexible pyroelectric sen-
and proven biocompatibility in human tissues, ultrasound-              sors with vibration and heating haptic feedback respectively
based wearable and flexible imaging sensor deserve attention.          from eccentric rotating mass vibrators and nichrome metal
Wang et al. put forward the stretchable ultrasonic phased ar-          wires (Fig. 6(b)). ATH-Rings with comfortable, self-powered
rays which can achieve continuous monitoring of deep-tissue            and low voltage-driving designs realized tactile feedback
hemodynamics [82]. The stretchable ultrasonic device elimi-            based on the advanced internet of things (IoT) portable
nated the air gap between traditional ultrasonic probe and skin        platform.
surface. However, the short continuous imaging duration and
the imaging stability disturbed by the displacement between
                                                                       2) TACTILE SENSING
device and skin are still the technology barriers to the develop-
                                                                       Among variable kinds of HMI technologies, tactile sensing
ment of wearable ultrasonic imaging. Wang et al. described a
                                                                       is one of the most fundamental mutual signal transmissions
bioadhesive ultrasound device based on a specific bioadhesive
                                                                       to achieve communication and control between human and
hydrogel-elastomer hybrid, which provides 48 hours of con-
                                                                       machine. Tactile sensing normally refers to processing contact
tinuous imaging of diverse internal organs, including blood
                                                                       or physical pressure signals via variable strategies such as
vessels, muscle, heart, gastrointestinal tract, diaphragm, and
                                                                       resistive [87], capacitive [88], piezoelectric [89], triboelec-
lung [83]. Fig. 6(f) shows the robust adhesion between the
                                                                       tric [90] and optical [91] technologies. Zhu et al. proposed
bioadhesive ultrasound device and the skin. This device can be
                                                                       a skin-electrode mechanosensing structure which consists of
used to observe the hemodynamic changes in the body, such
                                                                       two electrodes and the skin [92]. The skin acts as an ion-
as the diameter of the jugular vein in the subject increasing
                                                                       tronic interface where electrons and ions are separated by
from the sitting or standing position to the supine position,
                                                                       tiny voltage without occurring chemical reactions. As the
and the blood flow rate dramatically increasing after 0.5 hours
                                                                       capacitance of skin is in direct proportion to the contact
of physical exercise.
                                                                       area of skin-electrode interface, the mechanosensing structure
                                                                       can detect the minor changes in the contact area and quan-
B. HUMAN-MACHINE INTERFACE                                             tize in the form of capacitance value. Fig. 7(c) demonstrates
Human-Machine Interface (HMI) is a user interface or method            the working principle of the skin-electrode mechanosens-
that a user can interact with a machine through various bionic         ing structure. Textile-based skin-elecrode mechanosensing
signal such as motions, touches and so on. Recent develop-             structure enables cost-effective and convenient wearables for
ments in electronics, materials, and mechanical designs have           tactile sensing. As Fig. 7(c) shows, the smart glove indicates
offered more possibilities for wearable HMI devices.                   pressure distributions of grasping balloon and beaker sepa-
                                                                       rately.
                                                                          Human skin perceives tactile stimuli through skin mechan-
1) TACTILE FEEDBACK
                                                                       ical receptors including slow adaptive (SA) and fast adaptive
Tactile feedback mainly refers to provide users with percep-
                                                                       (FA), where separately responds to the static pressure and the
tible tactile information by directly stimulating the skin via
                                                                       high-frequency dynamic pressure. However, the strategies of
mechanical, pneumatic, electrical or thermal methods. Vari-
                                                                       tactile sensing mostly realize one of slow adaptive and fast
ous applications have been explored, which integrates with
                                                                       adaptive. Chunet al. raise an artificial neural tactile sensing
robot hand, touch screen and other feedback systems. Yu et al.
                                                                       system consisting of sensors that simultaneously mimic FA
proposed a wireless and battery-free haptic interface cooper-
                                                                       and SA mechanoreceptors and a neural stimulator that gen-
ating with virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR),
                                                                       erates sensory neuron-like signals which mimicked the real
which used tactile feedback to simulate the virtual world
                                                                       neural signals activated from the afferent nerves [92]. Robot
in addition to visual and audial feedback, which makes VR
                                                                       equipped with this artificial neural tactile sensing system
experience more immersive [84]. Mechanical-based haptic
                                                                       can be used for surface texture recognition based on a deep
interface induces tactile sensation on the skin via vibration
                                                                       learning technique that classify twenty fabrics with different
from electrical motors, electromagnetic actuators or piezo-
                                                                       textures.
electric devices. Fig. 7(a) presents the applications of online
social communication and robot hand control based on the
skin-integrated haptic interface. What’s more, Jung et al. put         3) GESTURE SENSING
forward a new strategy for haptic interface with the promotion         With the development of artificial intelligence, gesture sens-
of light weight and array precision to improve the strength            ing become a hot research object. Wearable and flexible

66                                                                                                                        VOLUME 4, 2023
FIGURE 7. Applications of skin electronics in human-machine interface. (a) A skin-integrated wireless haptic interfaces establishing feedback for social
communication and control of active prostheses [84]. (b) An augmented tactile feedback ring that enables thermo-haptic feedback in VR.[86]. (c) A
skin-electrode iontronic interface for tactile sensing, which can be applied to the smart glove for pressure indication of balloon and beaker [92]. (d) A
flexible and stretchable electronic device based on metal oxide nanofiber networks for gesture sensing [93]. (e) A bioinspired soft electroreceptor for
untouched somatosensation, which achieves the gesture distinguishing for movement control of game characters [94]. (f) A wireless human-machine
interface for closed-loop control between robot and human based on robotic VR [95]. (g) An epidermal electronic platform for EMG sensing and
electrotactile stimulation, which enables closed-loop control of the robotic arm to grip a bottle precisely [97].




electronics for precise gesture recognition are desirable for                  bending angles of finger fitted with the devices, which en-
lightweight and mechanically stretchable functions. Wang                       ables to translate hand gestures. Furthermore, Guo et al.
et al. raised a preparation method of flexible and stretchable                 [94] presented bio-inspired soft electroreceptors for artificial
metal oxide nanofiber networks for multimodal and mono-                        precontact somatosensation, which is capable of sensing ap-
lithically integrated wearable electronics [93] (Fig. 7(d)).                   proaching targets without contact by detecting the charges that
Hydrothermally derived oxide nanowires have been explored                      they carry naturally. Fig. 7(e) shows the electroreceptor matrix
via the blow-spinning method. The resistivity change of de-                    and its application in playing Super Mario using touchless
vices made from metal oxide nanofiber represents different                     control pad with four function keys.

VOLUME 4, 2023                                                                                                                                          67
YAO ET AL.: RECENT ADVANCES IN MATERIALS, DESIGNS AND APPLICATIONS OF SKIN ELECTRONICS




4) CLOSED-LOOP HMI                                                     device or system that fulfills this need. These are two
To realize a closer teaming between humans and robots, en-             completely different lines of thought of researchers, but
gagement, comprehension, and communication are required.               they both helped the development of skin electronics.
Wearable devices make it possible to construct a closed-loop           Since skin electronics involves multidiscipline efforts
control, sensing and feedback HMI system, where informa-               including materials science and engineering, mechanical
tion sensed by robotics could be felt by users. Liu et al.             engineering, electrical engineering, computational science,
presented a closed-loop HMI system based on skin-integrated            clinical medicine and even industrial or production designs,
electronics that complies with the whole body to provide               the seamless cooperation among researchers in different fields
wireless motion capturing and haptic feedback via Bluetooth,           becomes especially essential.
Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), and Internet [95]. Fig. 7(f) shows             Here we provided representative examples and organized
the closed-loop HMI which is applied to saliva sample col-             them in dimensions of materials, designs and applications
lection by nasopharyngeal swabs and difficult sport tasks              for the reference of developing novel skin electronics. How-
such as coughing, room cleaning, and patient care. What’s              ever, due to the length limitation we cannot include all of
more, Gu et al. proposed a soft neuroprosthetic hand pro-              them. There are many other materials types worth mentioning,
viding simultaneous myoelectric control and tactile feedback           such as semiconductors, dielectric elastomers, etc., and other
[96]. It is driven by pneumatic actuation, controlled by EMG           designs such as antenna designs for wireless communica-
signals and provides electrotactile feedback on the residual           tions, other applications such as wearable display, ambient or
limb. The soft neuroprosthetic hand has a better performance           motion energy harvesting, etc. We believed that although chal-
than neuroprosthetic hand in speed and dexterity. A person             lenges still remain, with the rapid development of the engi-
with a transradial amputation can use the soft neuroprosthetic         neering and fabrication techniques, and with the great need for
hand to recreate closed-loop control and primitive touch in            wearable multifunctional personal equipment, skin electronics
tests with blindfolds and acoustical isolation. Additionally,          could become mature products in consumer markets just like
Xu et al. [97] presented an HMI system applying the tac-               mobile phones do, which will definitely change our lifestyle,
tile feedback of electric stimulation with multiple sensors of         makes it more convenient, instant and seamlessly connected
electromyography (EMG), temperature and strain, which is               for no matter point-of-care, entertainment or communication.
constructed from patterned metal traces and polymer dielec-
tric materials on a thin layer of silicone elastomer. As Fig.7(g)      REFERENCES
shown, the subject can control the gripping motion of robotic          [1]  D.-Y. Khang, H. Jiang, Y. Huang, and J. A. Rogers, “A stretchable form
hand by EMG signal, where the gripping force can be adjusted                of single-crystal silicon for high-performance electronics on rubber
                                                                            substrates,” Science, vol. 311, pp. 208–212, 2006.
from the electric stimulation based on the force transducer on         [2] C. Larson et al., “Highly stretchable electroluminescent skin for op-
the robotic hand.                                                           tical signaling and tactile sensing,” Science, vol. 351, no. 6277,
                                                                            pp. 1071–1074, 2016, doi: 10.1126/science.aac5082.
                                                                       [3] M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi, and Z. Bao, “Highly conductive and
                                                                            transparent PEDOT: PSS films with a fluorosurfactant for stretchable
V. CONCLUSION                                                               and flexible transparent electrodes,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 22, no. 2,
The emerging of skin electronics makes it possible for people               pp. 421–428, 2012, doi: 10.1002/adfm.201101775.
                                                                       [4] Z. Ma et al., “Permeable superelastic liquid-metal fibre mat enables
to wear all kinds of healthcare monitoring or therapy devices,              biocompatible and monolithic stretchable electronics,” Nature Mater.,
and also smart communication or entertainment devices di-                   vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 859–868, 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41563-020-00902-3.
rectly on the skin, lightens the burden of carrying bulky or           [5] S. Wang et al., “Intrinsically stretchable electronics with ultrahigh de-
                                                                            formability to monitor dynamically moving organs,” Sci. Adv., vol. 8,
tethering devices, and also makes it simpler to acquire sig-                no. 13, 2022, Art. no. eabl5511, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abl5511.
nals, harvest energy and deliver stimulations to/from the skin.        [6] P. Lee et al., “Highly stretchable and highly conductive metal electrode
Undoubtedly it sheds some light on the style and platform                   by very long metal nanowire percolation network,” Adv. Mater., vol. 24,
                                                                            no. 25, pp. 3326–3332, 2012, doi: 10.1002/adma.201200359.
of next generation of ubiquitous electronics equipment in the          [7] X. Hu, P. Krull, B. De Graff, K. Dowling, J. A. Rogers, and W. J. Arora,
near future. However, the difficulties in efficiency, stability,            “Stretchable inorganic-semiconductor electronic systems,” Adv. Mater.,
reusability, mass manufacturing and cost may temporarily                    vol. 23, no. 26, pp. 2933–2936, 2011, doi: 10.1002/adma.201100144.
                                                                       [8] M. Amjadi, Y. J. Yoon, and I. Park, “Ultra-stretchable and skin-
hinder it from successful commercialization and universal use               mountable strain sensors using carbon nanotubes-Ecoflex nanocom-
in the modern society. To overcome these hurdles, researchers               posites,” Nanotechnology, vol. 26, no. 37, 2015, Art. no. 375501,
made great efforts to innovations of the functions, improve-                doi: 10.1088/0957-4484/26/37/375501.
                                                                       [9] S. Lin, H. Yuk, T. Zhang, G. A. Parada, and H. Koo, “Stretchable
ments of the performances, and maturation of fabrication                    hydrogel electronics and devices,” Adv. Mater., vol. 28, pp. 4497–4505,
process in developing better skin electronics.                              2016, doi: 10.1002/adma.201504152.
   A systematic developing process of a complete research              [10] S. Pan et al., “Mechanically interlocked hydrogel–elastomer hybrids
                                                                            for on-skin electronics,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 30, no. 29, 2020,
work in skin electronics may start from exploiting novel                    Art. no. 1909540, doi: 10.1002/adfm.201909540.
functional materials, then finding a proper design strategy to         [11] A. Miyamoto et al., “Inflammation-free, gas-permeable, lightweight,
adopt this novel material into a specific application scenario to           stretchable on-skin electronics with nanomeshes,” Nature Nanotechnol.,
                                                                            vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 907–913, 2017, doi: 10.1038/nnano.2017.125.
achieve better performance, or it could also start from noticing       [12] X. Yu et al., “Needle-shaped ultrathin piezoelectric microsystem for
the urgent need in a specific situation, and then try to find a             guided tissue targeting via mechanical sensing,” Nature Biomed. Eng.,
suitable design strategy or materials options to construct a                vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 165–172, 2018, doi: 10.1038/s41551-018-0201-6.

68                                                                                                                                    VOLUME 4, 2023
[13] M. Peddigari et al., “Flexible self-charging, ultrafast, high-power-          [35] G. H. Lee et al., “A personalized electronic tattoo for healthcare re-
     density ceramic capacitor system,” ACS Energy Lett., vol. 6, no. 4,                alized by On-the-Spot assembly of an intrinsically conductive and
     pp. 1383–1391, 2021, doi: 10.1021/acsenergylett.1c00170.                           durable liquid-metal composite,” Adv. Mater., vol. 34, no. 32, 2022,
[14] G. T. Hwang et al., “Self-powered cardiac pacemaker enabled                        Art. no. 2204159, doi: 10.1002/adma.202204159.
     by flexible single crystalline PMN-PT piezoelectric energy har-               [36] Z. Wang et al., “Ultrastretchable strain sensors and arrays with
     vester,” Adv. Mater., vol. 26, no. 28, pp. 4880–4887, 2014,                        high sensitivity and linearity based on super tough conductive hy-
     doi: 10.1002/adma.201400562.                                                       drogels,” Chem. Mater., vol. 30, no. 21, pp. 8062–8069, 2018,
[15] K.-Y. Chun, Y. J. Son, E.-S. Jeon, S. Lee, and C.-S. Han, “A                       doi: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b03999.
     self-powered sensor mimicking Slow- and Fast-Adapting cutaneous               [37] Y. Ohm, C. Pan, M. J. Ford, X. Huang, J. Liao, and C. Majidi, “An elec-
     mechanoreceptors,” Adv. Mater., vol. 30, 2018, Art. no. 1706299.                   trically conductive silver–polyacrylamide–alginate hydrogel composite
[16] X. Wang et al., “Bionic single-electrode electronic skin unit based on             for soft electronics,” Nature Electron., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 185–192, 2021,
     piezoelectric nanogenerator,” ACS Nano, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 8588–8596,             doi: 10.1038/s41928-021-00545-5.
     2018, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.8b04244.                                           [38] H. Huang et al., “Multiple stimuli responsive and identifiable
[17] Z. Cao, E. Koukharenko, M. J. Tudor, R. N. Torah, and S. P.                        zwitterionic ionic conductive hydrogel for bionic electronic skin,”
     Beeby, “Flexible screen printed thermoelectric generator with en-                  Adv. Electron. Mater., vol. 6, no. 7, 2020, Art. no. 2000239,
     hanced processes and materials,” Sensors Actuators A: Phys., vol. 238,             doi: 10.1002/aelm.202000239.
     pp. 196–206, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.sna.2015.12.016.                            [39] C. Liu, S. Han, H. Xu, J. Wu, and C. Liu, “Multifunctional highly sensi-
[18] C. S. Kim et al., “Structural design of a flexible thermoelectric                  tive multiscale stretchable strain sensor based on a Graphene/Glycerol-
     power generator for wearable applications,” Appl. Energy, vol. 214,                kcl synergistic conductive network,” ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces,
     pp. 131–138, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.01.074.                            vol. 10, no. 37, pp. 31716–31724, 2018, doi: 10.1021/acsami.8b12674.
[19] W. Ren et al., “High-performance wearable thermoelectric generator            [40] C. M. Tringides et al., “Viscoelastic surface electrode arrays to inter-
     with self-healing, recycling, and Lego-like reconfiguring capabilities,”           face with viscoelastic tissues,” Nature Nanotechnol., vol. 16, no. 9,
     Sci. Adv., vol. 7, no. 7, 2021, Art. no. eabe0586, doi: 10.1126/sci-               pp. 1019–1029, 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41565-021-00926-z.
     adv.abe0586.                                                                  [41] C. Keplinger, J. Sun, C. C. Foo, P. Rothemund, G. M. Whitesides, and
[20] W. Wu et al., “Flexible photodetector arrays based on patterned                    Z. Suo, “Stretchable, transparent, ionic conductors,” Science, vol. 341,
     CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite film for real-time photosensing and                     pp. 984–988, 2013.
     imaging,” Adv. Mater., vol. 31, no. 3, 2019, Art. no. 1805913,                [42] T. Pan et al., “Experimental and theoretical studies of serpen-
     doi: 10.1002/adma.201805913.                                                       tine interconnects on ultrathin elastomers for stretchable electron-
[21] Y. Lei et al., “A fabrication process for flexible single-crystal per-             ics,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 27, no. 37, 2017, Art. no. 1702589,
     ovskite devices,” Nature, vol. 583, no. 7818, pp. 790–795, 2020,                   doi: 10.1002/adfm.201702589.
     doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2526-z.                                               [43] Y. Zhang et al., “Experimental and theoretical studies of serpentine
[22] H. H. Chou et al., “A chameleon-inspired stretchable electronic skin               microstructures bonded to prestrained elastomers for stretchable elec-
     with interactive colour changing controlled by tactile sensing,” Nature            tronics,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 24, no. 14, pp. 2028–2037, 2014,
     Commun., vol. 6, 2015, Art. no. 8011, doi: 10.1038/ncomms9011.                     doi: 10.1002/adfm.201302957.
[23] T. G. Yun et al., “All-transparent stretchable electrochromic supercapac-     [44] H. Song et al., “Highly-integrated, miniaturized, stretchable electronic
     itor wearable patch device,” ACS Nano, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 3141–3150,              systems based on stacked multilayer network materials,” Sci. Adv.,
     2019, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.8b08560.                                                vol. 8, no. 11, 2022, Art. no. eabm3785, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abm3785.
[24] X. Zhao et al., “Self-powered user-interactive electronic skin for pro-       [45] H. U. Chung et al., “Binodal, wireless epidermal electronic systems
     grammable touch operation platform,” Sci. Adv., vol. 6, no. 28, 2020,              with in-sensor analytics for neonatal intensive care,” Science, vol. 363,
     Art. no. eaba4294, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aba4294.                                    no. 6430, 2019, Art. no. eaau0780, doi: 10.1126/science.aau0780.
[25] F. Ershad et al., “Ultra-conformal drawn-on-skin electronics for              [46] C. C. Vu and J. Kim, “Fractal structures in flexible electronic
     multifunctional motion artifact-free sensing and point-of-care treat-              devices,” Mater. Today Phys., vol. 27, 2022, Art. no. 100795,
     ment,” Nature Commun., vol. 11, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 3823,                        doi: 10.1016/j.mtphys.2022.100795.
     doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17619-1.                                              [47] J. A. Fan et al., “Fractal design concepts for stretchable electronics,” Na-
[26] Y. Jiang et al., “Topological supramolecular network enabled high-                 ture Commun., vol. 5, 2014, Art. no. 3266, doi: 10.1038/ncomms4266.
     conductivity, stretchable organic bioelectronics,” Science, vol. 375,         [48] L. Tian et al., “Large-area MRI-compatible epidermal electronic
     no. 6587, pp. 1411–1417, 2022, doi: 10.1126/science.abj7564.                       interfaces for prosthetic control and cognitive monitoring,”
[27] X. Huang et al., “Transient, implantable, ultrathin biofuel cells                  Nature Biomed. Eng., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 194–205, 2019,
     enabled by laser-induced graphene and gold nanoparticles                           doi: 10.1038/s41551-019-0347-x.
     composite,” Nano Lett., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 3447–3456, 2022,                  [49] J. Chen et al., “Highly stretchable organic electrochemical transis-
     doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.2c00864.                                                 tors with strain-resistant performance,” Nature Mater., vol. 21, no. 5,
[28] B. Sun et al., “Gas-permeable, multifunctional on-skin electronics                 pp. 564–571, 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41563-022-01239-9.
     based on laser-induced porous graphene and sugar-templated elas-              [50] J. He et al., “Trampoline inspired stretchable triboelectric nanogenera-
     tomer sponges,” Adv. Mater., vol. 30, no. 50, 2018, Art. no. 1804327,              tors as tactile sensors for epidermal electronics,” Nano Energy, vol. 81,
     doi: 10.1002/adma.201804327.                                                       2021, Art. no. 105590, doi: 10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.105590.
[29] M. H. Kim et al., “Thermoelectric energy harvesting electronic skin (e-       [51] J. Kang, J. H. Park, D. S. Choi, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Kim, and J. H.
     skin) patch with reconfigurable carbon nanotube clays,” Nano Energy,               Cho, “Design of wavy ag microwire array for mechanically stable,
     vol. 87, 2021, Art. no. 106156, doi: 10.1016/j.nanoen.2021.106156.                 multimodal vibrational haptic interface,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 29,
[30] H. Yuk, B. Lu, and X. Zhao, “Hydrogel bioelectronics,” Chem. Soc.                  no. 35, 2019, Art. no. 1902703, doi: 10.1002/adfm.201902703.
     Rev., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1642–1667, 2019, doi: 10.1039/c8cs00595h.           [52] S. Huang, Y. Liu, C. F. Guo, and Z. Ren, “A highly stretchable
[31] Y. Q. Liu, Z. Di Chen, J. W. Mao, D. D. Han, and X. Sun, “Laser                    and fatigue-free transparent electrode based on an in-plane buckled
     fabrication of graphene-based electronic skin,” Front. Chem., vol. 7,              au nanotrough network,” Adv. Electron. Mater., vol. 3, no. 3, 2017,
     pp. 2016–2020, 2019, doi: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00461.                                Art. no. 1600534, doi: 10.1002/aelm.201600534.
[32] W. H. Yeo et al., “Multifunctional epidermal electronics printed directly     [53] Y. Xu et al., “Multiscale porous elastomer substrates for multifunc-
     onto the skin,” Adv. Mater., vol. 25, no. 20, pp. 2773–2778, 2013,                 tional on-skin electronics with passive-cooling capabilities,” Proc.
     doi: 10.1002/adma.201204426.                                                       Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 205–213, 2020,
[33] P. Wu, J. Fu, Y. Xu, and Y. He, “Liquid metal microgels for three-                 doi: 10.1073/pnas.1917762116.
     dimensional printing of smart electronic clothes,” ACS Appl. Mater.           [54] K. I. Jang et al., “Self-assembled three dimensional network designs
     Interfaces, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 13458–13467, 2022, doi: 10.1021/ac-               for soft electronics,” Nature Commun., vol. 8, 2017, Art. no. 15894,
     sami.1c22975.                                                                      doi: 10.1038/ncomms15894.
[34] P. Wu, Z. Wang, X. Yao, J. Fu, and Y. He, “Recyclable conductive              [55] T. H. Wong et al., “Triboelectric nanogenerator tattoos enabled by
     nanoclay for direct: In situ printing flexible electronics,” Mater. Horiz.,        epidermal electronic technologies,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 32, no. 15,
     vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 2006–2017, 2021, doi: 10.1039/d0mh02065f.                       2022, Art. no. 2111269, doi: 10.1002/adfm.202111269.



VOLUME 4, 2023                                                                                                                                                   69
YAO ET AL.: RECENT ADVANCES IN MATERIALS, DESIGNS AND APPLICATIONS OF SKIN ELECTRONICS




[56] J. J. S. Norton et al., “Soft, curved electrode systems capable of inte-    [76] Y. Song et al., “Wireless battery-free wearable sweat sensor powered
     gration on the auricle as a persistent brain-computer interface,” Proc.          by human motion,” Sci. Adv., vol. 6, no. 40, 2020, Art. no. eaay9842,
     Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., vol. 112, no. 13, pp. 3920–3925, 2015,                doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay9842.
     doi: 10.1073/pnas.1424875112.                                               [77] M. Wang et al., “A wearable electrochemical biosensor for the mon-
[57] F. Jiang et al., “Stretchable, breathable, and stable lead-free                  itoring of metabolites and nutrients,” Nature Biomed. Eng., 2022,
     perovskite_polymer nanofiber composite for hybrid triboelectric                  doi: 10.1038/s41551-022-00916-z.
     and piezoelectric energy harvesting,” Adv. Mater., vol. 34, 2022,           [78] L. Tian et al., “Flexible and stretchable 3ω sensors for thermal char-
     Art. no. 2200042.                                                                acterization of human skin,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 27, no. 26, 2017,
[58] F. Liang et al., “An all-fabric droplet-based energy harvester with              Art. no. 1701282, doi: 10.1002/adfm.201701282.
     topology optimization,” Adv. Energy Mater., vol. 12, no. 9, 2022,           [79] B. Nemeth, M. S. Piechocinski, and D. R. S. Cumming, “High-
     Art. no. 2102991, doi: 10.1002/aenm.202102991.                                   resolution real-time ion-camera system using a CMOS-based chemical
[59] W. Fan et al., “Machine-knitted washable sensor array textile for precise        sensor array for proton imaging,” Sensors Actuators B: Chem., vol. 171–
     epidermal physiological signal monitoring,” Sci. Adv., vol. 6, no. 11,           172, pp. 747–752, 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.snb.2012.05.066.
     2020, Art. no. eaay2840, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay2840.                       [80] D. Suzuki, S. Oda, and Y. Kawano, “A flexible and wearable tera-
[60] Q. Zhuang et al., “Liquid–metal-superlyophilic and conductivity–                 hertz scanner,” Nature Photon., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 809–813, 2016,
     strain-enhancing scaffold for permeable superelastic conductors,”                doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2016.209.
     Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 31, no. 47, 2021, Art. no. 2105587,                [81] D. R. Agrawal et al., “Conformal phased surfaces for wireless powering
     doi: 10.1002/adfm.202105587.                                                     of bioelectronic microdevices,” Nature Biomed. Eng., vol. 1, no. 3,
[61] X. Xiao et al., “An ultrathin rechargeable solid-state zinc ion fiber            2017, Art. no. 0043, doi: 10.1038/s41551-017-0043.
     battery for electronic textiles,” Sci. Adv., vol. 7, no. 49, 2021,          [82] C. Wang et al., “Continuous monitoring of deep-tissue haemodynamics
     Art. no. eabl3742, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abl3742.                                  with stretchable ultrasonic phased arrays,” Nature Biomed. Eng., vol. 5,
[62] L. Zhang et al., “Fully organic compliant dry electrodes self-adhesive           no. 7, pp. 749–758, 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41551-021-00763-4.
     to skin for long-term motion-robust epidermal biopotential mon-             [83] C. Wang et al., “Bioadhesive ultrasound for long-term continuous imag-
     itoring,” Nature Commun., vol. 11, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 4683,                   ing of diverse organs,” Science, vol. 377, no. 6605, pp. 517–523, 2022,
     doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-18503-8.                                                 doi: 10.1126/science.abo2542.
[63] M. Zulqarnain et al., “A flexible ECG patch compatible with NFC RF          [84] X. Yu et al., “Skin-integrated wireless haptic interfaces for virtual and
     communication,” NPJ Flex. Electron., vol. 4, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 13,           augmented reality,” Nature, vol. 575, no. 7783, pp. 473–479, 2019,
     doi: 10.1038/s41528-020-0077-x.                                                  doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1687-0.
[64] N. Kim, T. Lim, K. Song, S. Yang, and J. Lee, “Stretchable multichan-       [85] Y. H. Jung et al., “A wireless haptic interface for programmable pat-
     nel electromyography sensor array covering large area for controlling            terns of touch across large areas of the skin,” Nature Electron., vol. 5,
     home electronics with distinguishable signals from multiple muscles,”            pp. 374–385, 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41928-022-00765-3.
     ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, vol. 8, no. 32, pp. 21070–21076, 2016,         [86] Z. Sun, M. Zhu, X. Shan, and C. Lee, “Augmented tactile-perception
     doi: 10.1021/acsami.6b05025.                                                     and haptic-feedback rings as human-machine interfaces aiming for
[65] S. K. Ameri et al., “Imperceptible electrooculography graphene sensor            immersive interactions,” Nature Commun., vol. 13, no. 1, 2022,
     system for human–robot interface,” NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., vol. 2, no. 1,           Art. no. 5224, doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32745-8.
     2018, Art. no. 19, doi: 10.1038/s41699-018-0064-4.                          [87] S. Pyo, J. Lee, W. Kim, E. Jo, and J. Kim, “Multi-layered, hierarchi-
[66] M. Lin, H. Hu, S. Zhou, and S. Xu, “Soft wearable devices for                    cal fabric-based tactile sensors with high sensitivity and linearity in
     deep-tissue sensing,” Nature Rev. Mater., vol. 7, pp. 850–869, 2022,             ultrawide pressure range,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 29, no. 35, 2019,
     doi: 10.1038/s41578-022-00427-y.                                                 Art. no. 1902484, doi: 10.1002/adfm.201902484.
[67] Y. Ning, M. Zhang, Y. Lang, Y. Gong, X. Yang, and W. Pang,                  [88] T. Li et al., “Flexible capacitive tactile sensor based on micropat-
     “Electronic stethoscope based on triangular cantilever piezoelectric bi-         terned dielectric layer,” Small, vol. 12, no. 36, pp. 5042–5048, 2016,
     morph MEMS transducers,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 31, no. 3,             doi: 10.1002/smll.201600760.
     pp. 450–456, 2022, doi: 10.1109/JMEMS.2022.3160761.                         [89] W. Lin, B. Wang, G. Peng, Y. Shan, H. Hu, and Z. Yang, “Skin-inspired
[68] B. Chen, D. Liu, T. Jiang, W. Tang, and Z. L. Wang, “A tribo-                    piezoelectric tactile sensor array with crosstalk-free row+column elec-
     electric closed-loop sensing system for authenticity identification of           trodes for spatiotemporally distinguishing diverse stimuli,” Adv. Sci.,
     paper-based artworks,” Adv. Mater. Technol., vol. 5, no. 9, 2020,                vol. 8, no. 3, 2021, Art. no. 2002817, doi: 10.1002/advs.202002817.
     Art. no. 2000194, doi: 10.1002/admt.202000194.                              [90] X. Pu et al., “Ultrastretchable, transparent triboelectric nanogenerator
[69] O. Goni, S. Lee, H. Jin, N. Matsuhisa, H. Jinno, and A. Miyamoto,                as electronic skin for biomechanical energy harvesting and tactile sens-
     “All-nanofiber-based, ultrasensitive, gas-permeable mechanoacoustic              ing,” Sci. Adv., vol. 3, no. 5, 2017, Art. no. e1700015, doi: 10.1126/sci-
     sensors for continuous long-term heart monitoring,” Proc. Nat. Acad.             adv.1700015.
     Sci., vol. 117, no. 13, pp. 7063–7070, 2020.                                [91] R. Wei et al., “Self-powered all-optical tactile sensing platform for user-
[70] Y. Liu et al., “Epidermal mechano-acoustic sensing electronics for               interactive interface,” Adv. Mater. Technol., 2022, Art. no. 2200757,
     cardiovascular diagnostics and human-machine interfaces,” Sci. Adv.,             doi: 10.1002/admt.202200757.
     vol. 2, 2016, Art. no. e1601185.                                            [92] P. Zhu et al., “Skin-electrode iontronic interface for mechanosens-
[71] K. H. Lee et al., “Mechano-acoustic sensing of physiological processes           ing,” Nature Commun., vol. 12, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 4731,
     and body motions via a soft wireless device placed at the supraster-             doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-24946-4.
     nal notch,” Nature Biomed. Eng., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 148–158, 2019,          [93] B. Wang et al., “Flexible and stretchable metal oxide nanofiber
     doi: 10.1038/s41551-019-0480-6.                                                  networks for multimodal and monolithically integrated wearable
[72] H. J. Pandya, W. Chen, L. A. Goodell, D. J. Foran, and J. P. Desai,              electronics,” Nature Commun., vol. 11, 2020, Art. no. 2405,
     “Mechanical phenotyping of breast cancer using MEMS: A method                    doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16268-8.
     to demarcate benign and cancerous breast tissues,” Lab Chip, vol. 14,       [94] Z. H. Guo et al., “Bioinspired soft electroreceptors for artificial precon-
     no. 23, pp. 4523–4532, 2014, doi: 10.1039/c4lc00594e.                            tact somatosensation,” Sci. Adv., vol. 8, no. 21, 2022, Art. no. eabo5201,
[73] C. Dagdeviren et al., “Conformal piezoelectric systems for                       doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abo5201.
     clinical and experimental characterization of soft tissue                   [95] Y. Liu et al., “Electronic skin as wireless human-machine interfaces
     biomechanics,” Nature Mater., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 728–736, 2015,                 for robotic VR,” Sci. Adv., vol. 8, no. 2, 2022, Art. no. eabl6700,
     doi: 10.1038/nmat4289.                                                           doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abl6700.
[74] E. Song et al., “Miniaturized electromechanical devices for the char-       [96] G. Gu et al., “A soft neuroprosthetic hand providing simultaneous
     acterization of the biomechanics of deep tissue,” Nature Biomed. Eng.,           myoelectric control and tactile feedback,” Nature Biomed. Eng., 2021,
     vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 759–771, 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41551-021-00723-y.               doi: 10.1038/s41551-021-00767-0.
[75] A. J. Bandodkar et al., “Battery-free, skin-interfaced microflu-            [97] B. Xu et al., “An epidermal stimulation and sensing platform for
     idic/electronic systems for simultaneous electrochemical, colorimetric,          sensorimotor prosthetic control, management of lower back exer-
     and volumetric analysis of sweat,” Sci. Adv., vol. 5, no. 1, 2019,               tion, and electrical muscle activation,” Adv. Mater., vol. 28, no. 22,
     Art. no. eaav3294, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aav3294.                                  pp. 4462–4471, 2016, doi: 10.1002/adma.201504155.



70                                                                                                                                                VOLUME 4, 2023
